University of Chicago Instructor: Tony Lauricella

NEAA 20061, 30061 ajlauricella@uchicago.edu

ANTH 26710, 36710 Office: Oriental Institute 202 (CAMEL Lab)

GEOG 25400, 35400 Office Hours: T/Th 1-4 or by appointment

Autumn 2019

Tuesdays/Thursdays 11:00-12:20

BSLC 018 (924 East 57th Street, 41.7919, -87.6025)

# Ancient Landscapes of the Middle East 1

Overview of the Sequence: This course provides an introduction to theories and methods of landscape studies and spatial analysis, in particular the use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Students will acquire the ability to generate, process, visualize, and analyze archaeological (and anthropological, historical, and environmental) data. Techniques will be presented through case studies, the majority of which will center around the ancient Middle East and Mediterranean world. The first course will cover the basics of ESRI ArcGIS software, fundamental theories and conceptions of landscape archaeology, and will culminate in a research proposal. In the second quarter we will pursue a wider variety of more advanced topics and dataset. For this quarter&#39;s final project students will carry out their proposed project and present their findings to the public at a poster session held in the Oriental Institute.

Summary of Autumn quarter: This course analyzes the relationship between humans and the cultural and natural landscapes of the Middle East in various time periods. We will study the ways in which archaeologists, anthropologists, geographers, and other scholars have used surveys, maps, aerial photographs, and remotely-sensed datasets to document and investigate human activity across spaces of different scales throughout history. We will look at the basic assumptions behind (and history of) these kinds of analyses. A major portion of the course will be an introduction to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) software, specifically ESRI ArcGIS, which is the academic and industry standard. Students will learn the basics of creating, modifying, displaying, and analyzing vector (point, line, and polygon), and raster (pixel based) datasets. Through exercises and readings in relevant case studies we will investigate the ways in which difficult questions about landscapes can be answered with spatial data. This quarter&#39;s final project will be a research proposal for a landscape archaeological (or closely related) project using GIS, remote sensing, or other methods learned in the class.

Course Format: Typically we will introduce new concepts and methods on Tuesdays, then on Thursdays we&#39;ll discuss case studies implementing these ideas before we start lab exercises. Please come prepared to have productive and beneficial discussions.

Course Requirements and Grading

Evaluation will be on the following criteria:

## 1) Attendance and participation (15%)

The course material will build on previously discussed skills and concepts. Specifically, the best way to become proficient in GIS is to experiment and make mistakes in a collaborative environment. Everyone is expected to attend all class meetings prepared to discuss the assigned readings.

## 2) Lab Assignments (30%)

Students will complete the assigned labs outside of class. These are intended to reinforce technical skills and methods, and provide a guided opportunity to work through your own data. Submitted work must be original and independently produced. Labs should be turned in via email by the Thursday after they are assigned.

3) **Midterm** (15%)

4) **Research proposa** l (35%)

In the first few weeks of the course, students should select a geographic region and begin developing a research question that will structure an independent project. In the fall quarter we will work on assembling the relevant datasets and methods for analysis. At the end of the quarter, students will prepare a detailed research proposal along the lines of a NSF Dissertation Improvement Grant application (up to 10 pages single-spaced text/five pages of figures). The proposal should build on datasets you&#39;ve gathered and analyzed in the labs, and should demonstrate extensive research into previous work on your topic. While only a proposal, your project (or at least a significant part of it) must be work you can actually carry out in a laboratory setting in Chicago.

## 5 ) Peer review (5%)

Before the end of the quarter students will exchange rough drafts of their proposal and will be responsible for preparing a brief (2-3 page) critique of your partner&#39;s work.

### Software Access and Technical Issues

All the workstations in our classroom (BSLC 018) have ArcGIS and Google Earth installed. This space is not available outside of class hours. GIS software is available several other places on campus. The Center for Ancient Middle Eastern Landscapes (CAMEL, Oriental Institute 202, https://oi.uchicago.edu/research/camel/about-camel) has workstations with ArcGIS, Google Earth, as well as Adobe Photoshop and other potentially useful software. These workstations are available for walk-in use whenever the lab is open (typically 9 am-5 pm Monday-Friday) and when OI researchers/CAMEL staff members are not using them.

ArcGIS is available in a number of other UChicago computer labs. Please see the following website for a complete list: https://gis.rcc.uchicago.edu/content/lab-facilities

### Installing Software on Your Own Computer

**Google Earth** : This software, which runs on both Macs and PCs, is a powerful tool for quickly visualizing modern landscapes. If you do not already have Google Earth on your personal computer, you should download it at http://earth.google.com.

**ArcGIS** : A single-use license is free to students enrolled in the course and good for one year. While having your own copy is helpful, it is not required for the class. You will need a PC running Windows. For full minimum system requirements, see ESRI&#39;s webpage: [http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[-](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[requirements/latest/arcgis](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[-](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[desktop](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[-](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[system](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)[requirements.htm#](http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/system-requirements/latest/arcgis-desktop-system-requirements.htm)

A note to Mac users: ArcGIS does not run on OSX. If you own a Macintosh and want to run the software on your computer, you can create a Windows partition on your hard drive (via Bootcamp) or run Windows on a Virtual Machine (via Parallels Desktop or other software). You&#39;ll have to also have a functional copy of Windows. The TechBar in Regenstein has been able to help students with this in the past.

Backing Up Your Data: Computer crashes or data loss are not valid excuses for late assignments. ArcGIS is prone to frequent crashes, so you should back up your data frequently. I recommend a large portable hard drive. Cloud storage is an option for archiving stable datasets, but is not recommended for storing ongoing project data.

Texts: All readings for this class are available on the course website. While there is no single textbook, sections of the following texts will be assigned frequently. PDFs are on Canvas. I will put a selection of useful books on reserve in the OI Research Archives.

Conolly, James and Mark Lake. _Geographical Informational Systems in Archaeology_. New York, Cambridge UP, 2006.

Shannon, McPherron and Harold Dibble. _Using Computers in Archaeology: A Practical Guide_. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2002.

Wheatley, David and Mark Gillings. _Spatial Technology and Archaeology: The Archaeological Applications of GIS_. New York: Taylor &amp; Francis, 2002.

Wilkinson, T.J. _Archaeological Landscapes of the Ancient Near East_. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2003.

Schedule and Readings (Subject to Change)

Week 1: The Basics

**Oct 1:** Introduction to the course

Goals of the course, technical issues, basics concepts of Geographic Information Systems, designing a final project, examples

**Oct 3:** Space and Landscape: Terminology/definitions, ways of seeing

Ingold, Tim. &quot;The Temporality of the Landscape.&quot; _World Archaeology_ 25.2 (1993): 152-174

Wheatley, David and Mark Gillings. _Spatial Technology and Archaeology: The Archaeological Applications of GIS_. New York: Taylor &amp; Francis, 2002, pp. 1-18.

Week 2 Landscape Archaeology and Spatial Technologies

**Oct 8** : History of Landscape Archaeology

Wilkinson, T.J. _Archaeological Landscapes of the Ancient Near East_. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2003, pp. 3-14.

Anschuetz et al. &quot;An Archaeology of Landscapes: Perspectives and Directions.&quot; _Journal of Archaeological Research_ 9.2 (2001): 157-211.

**Oct 10** : Maps, Projections, and Cartography

Conolly, James and Mark Lake. _Geographical Informational Systems in Archaeology_. New York, Cambridge UP, 2006, pp. 11-32

Rondelli et al. &quot;Soviet Military Maps and Archaeological Survey in the Samarkand Region&quot; _Journal of Cultural Heritage_ 14.3 (2013): 270-276.

Week 3 Archaeological Survey

**Oct 15** : Archaeological Survey Methodology

Schiffer et al. &quot;The Design of Archaeological Surveys&quot; _World Archaeology_ 10.1 (1978): 1-28

Dunnell, R.C. &quot;The Notion Site&quot; in Rossignol and Wansnider eds. _Space, Time, and Archaeological Landscapes_. New York: Plenum, 1992, pp. 21-41.

Wilkinson 2003, &quot;Chapter 3: Recording the Ancient Near Eastern Landscape,&quot; pp. 33-43

Optional: Cherry, John. &quot;Frogs around the Pond: Perspectives on Current Archaeological Survey Projects in the Mediterranean Region&quot; in Keller, Donald R., and David W. Rupp eds. _Archaeological survey in the Mediterranean Area_. Oxford: BAR, 1983, pp. 375-416.

**Oct 17** : Working with vector data

Bikoulis et al. &quot;Above as Below: Application of Multiple Survey Techniques at a Byzantine Church at Avkat.&quot; _Landscape and Settlement Dynamics in Northern Anatolia in the Roman and Byzantine Period. Geographica Historica_ 32 (2015): 101-117.

Wilkinson, T.J. et al. &quot;From Nucleation to Dispersal: Trends in Settlement Pattern in the Northern Fertile Crescent.&quot; In Cherry and Alcock eds. _Side by Side Survey: Comparative Regional Studies in the Mediterranean World._ Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2004, pp.198-205.

_ERDAS Field Guide,_ pp. 41-54 [skim]

## Lab #2: Working with Vector Data

Week 4 Raster data part 1

**Oct 22** : Aerial perspective and aerial imagery

Ur, Jason. &quot;CORONA Satellite Imagery and Ancient Near Eastern Landscapes&quot; in M.J. Harrow and M.C. Comer eds. _Mapping Archaeological Landscapes from Space_. New York: Springer, 2013, pp. 21-31.

Shannon, McPherron and Harold Dibble. _Using Computers in Archaeology: A Practical Guide_. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2002, pp. 160-177.

_ERDAS Field Guide_, pp. 1-17 [skim]

**Oct 24** : Working with Raster datasets

Challis et al. &quot;Corona Remotely Sensed Imagery in Dryland Archaeology: The Islamic City of alRaqqa.&quot; _Journal of Field Archaeology_ 29.1-2 (2004): 139-153.

Ur, Jason. &quot;CORONA Satellite Photography and Ancient Road Networks.&quot; _Antiquity_ 77 (2003): 102-115.

## Lab #3: Raster Data and Aerial Photography

Week 5 Raster data, part 2

**Oct 29** : Satellite Remote Sensing in Archaeology

Hritz, Carrie. &quot;Contributions of GIS and Satellite-based Remote Sensing to Landscape Archaeology in the Middle East.&quot; _Journal of Archaeological Research_ 22.3 (2014): 229276.

Abrams, Michael and Douglas Comer. &quot;Multispectral and Hyperspectral Technology and Archaeological Applications.&quot; In M.J. Harrow and M.C. Comer eds. _Mapping_

_Archaeological Landscapes from Space_. New York: Springer, 2013, pp. 57-71.

**Oct 31** : Case studies in Remote Sensing

Altaweel, Mark. &quot;The Use of ASTER Satellite Imagery in Archaeological Contexts.&quot; _Archaeological Prospection_ 12

Hritz, Carrie. &quot;Tracing Settlement Patterns and Channel Systems in Southern Mesopotamia Using Remote Sensing.&quot; _Journal of Field Archaeology_ 35 (2010): 184-203.

Lasaponara, Rosa and Nicola Masini. &quot;Detection of Archaeological Crop Marks by using Satellite Quickbird Multispectral Imagery.&quot; _Journal of Archaeological Science_ 34 (2007): 214-221.

**Lab # 4: Multispectral Raster Lab**

Week 6 Midterm

**Nov 5:** Midterm exam

Nov 7: Interpretation of Satellite Imagery

Wilkinson 2003, pp. 44-70

Franklin, Kathryn, and Emily Hammer. &quot;Untangling Palimpsest Landscapes in Conflict Zones: A &quot;Remote Survey&quot; in Spin Boldak, Southeast Afghanistan.&quot; _Journal of Field Archaeology_ 43, no. 1 (2018): 58-73.

## Lab #7: Imagery Interpretation and Remote Survey Lab

Week 7 Spatial Analysis

Nov 12

Nov 14: Analyses

Kosiba, Steve and Andrew Bauer. &quot;Mapping the Political Landscape: toward a GIS analysis of Environmental and Social Difference.&quot; _Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory_ 20.1 (2013): 61-101.

Richards, J.E. &quot;Conceptual Landscapes in the Egyptian Nile Valley&quot; in Knapp and Ashmore eds. _Archaeologies of Landscape: Contemporary Perspectives_. Malden: Blackwell, 1999, pp.83-100.

## Lab: Spatial Analysis Lab

## Lab #6: Open Source Data and Interoperability

Week 8 Datasets

**Nov 19** : Geospatial databases

**Nov 21** :

Week 9 Spatial Analysis

**Nov 26** : Methods of Spatial Analysis

Wheatley and Gillings 2002, pp. 113-147

**Nov 28: Thanksgiving holiday**

Case Studies

Andrews, Brian N., Jason M. LaBelle, and John D. Seebach. &quot;Spatial variability in the Folsom archaeological record: a multi-scalar approach.&quot; _American Antiquity_ 73, no. 3 (2008): 464-490.

Hammer, Emily. &quot;Local landscape organization of mobile pastoralists in southeastern Turkey.&quot; _Journal of Anthropological Archaeology_ 35 (2014): 269-288.

Wilkinson, Tony J. &quot;The definition of ancient manured zones by means of extensive sherdsampling techniques.&quot; _Journal of Field Archaeology_ 9 (1982): 323-333.

Wilkinson, Tony J. &quot;Extensive sherd scatters and land use intensity: Some recent results.&quot; _Journal of Field Archaeology_ 16 (1989): 31-46.

## Lab #8: Spatial Analysis

Week 10 End of Term

**Dec 3** : Peer Review

**Dec 5:** Reading period, optional open lab day

## \*Final Project Proposals due Monday, December 10th\*

8
