Bibliography

Anschuetz et al. &quot;An Archaeology of Landscapes: Perspectives and Directions.&quot; _Journal of Archaeological Research_ 9.2 (2001): 157-211.

Bikoulis et al. &quot;Above as Below: Application of Multiple Survey Techniques at a Byzantine Church at Avkat.&quot; _Landscape and Settlement Dynamics in Northern Anatolia in the Roman and Byzantine Period. Geographica Historica_ 32 (2015): 101-117.

Dunnell, R.C. &quot;The Notion Site&quot; in Rossignol and Wansnider eds. _Space, Time, and Archaeological Landscapes_. New York: Plenum, 1992, pp. 21-41.

Conolly, James and Mark Lake. _Geographical Informational Systems in Archaeology_. New York, Cambridge UP, 2006.

Rondelli et al. &quot;Soviet Military Maps and Archaeological Survey in the Samarkand Region&quot; _Journal of Cultural Heritage_ 14.3 (2013): 270-276.

Schiffer et al. &quot;The Design of Archaeological Surveys&quot; _World Archaeology_ 10.1 (1978): 1-28

Shannon, McPherron and Harold Dibble. _Using Computers in Archaeology: A Practical Guide_. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2002.

Ur, Jason. &quot;CORONA Satellite Imagery and Ancient Near Eastern Landscapes&quot; in M.J. Harrow and M.C. Comer eds. _Mapping Archaeological Landscapes from Space_. New York: Springer, 2013, pp. 21-31.

Wheatley, David and Mark Gillings. _Spatial Technology and Archaeology: The Archaeological Applications of GIS_. New York: Taylor &amp; Francis, 2002.

Wilkinson, T.J. _Archaeological Landscapes of the Ancient Near East_. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2003.

Wilkinson, T.J. et al. &quot;From Nucleation to Dispersal: Trends in Settlement Pattern in the Northern Fertile Crescent.&quot; In Cherry and Alcock eds. _Side by Side Survey: Comparative Regional Studies in the Mediterranean World._ Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2004, pp.198-205.
